### Play - Move from manager to faciliator

Self-organized teams inevitably leads to the question; What do project or program managers do now?  Not only do the managers themselves ask the question, but also those who report to them.  The traditional hierarchy is blown up and things get uncomfortable.  The first step to accepting the new way is to acknowledge the manager now is more of a facilitator who embraces servant leadership.

The facilitator role is difficult for those who are more comfortable with assigning work (or having it assigned) and receiving status until it is complete.  Agile tools provide the capability for anyone to  pull status when needed from an information radiator.  This style of progress/status can uncomfortable for the team member as well as the manager.  Both are used to proving their worth every day through status discussions, they may miss the connection or ability to get daily reinforcement they are on track.  This reinforcement now comes from team members who may not know how to support each other in that way.  In comes the role of facilitator.  S/he can help in the daily standup, as an example, asking leading questions "John, was the input what you needed from Jane?" Good facilitation can enhance what would formally been feedback from the manager, to help build relationships within the team.  

In addition to the move from valuing status, the facilitator now has the ability to help the team self-organize by executing planning events where the team can concentrate on the work.  Although the team develops the sprint or release plan, this new role helps them execute through daily standup, monitoring and reporting measurements to upper management, executing ceremonies, and concentrating on improving the human happiness.

The most positive aspect of moving to a facilitator role, is that there is more time to focus on developing individuals and the team.  Formerly repetitive processes associated with status, are now valued less than the cohesiveness of the team and building together.  This is shown through the time spent in reflecting and discussing how the team works together (most focused during retrospectives but welcome at any time).  The facilitator now has time to help the individual achieve goals also, through enabling interesting work on the team, and working through a long term career path.  Although the role may be initially uncomfortable, its vital enabling agility on the team and scaling to the organization.

## Play - Embrace servant leadership

After loving facilitation, and feeling as though you no longer need control over the team, you are ready to embrace servant leadership.  In facilitation, you often learn you are not the person with the answer, rather you look to the team for answers as it helps the individuals and team, more than it helps you.  This is a very humbling experience.  The humility you learn as a facilitator guides your growth as a servant leader.  You celebrate the team’s success of producing a valuable quality product.  You view yourself as the person always thinking of ways to improve their worklife to create their best work, by clearing impediments and not interfering.  This is strange and different for those used to being the go-to person, or being a hub.  

For teams used to having a clear leader to make all decisions, this type of leadership can be very unnerving.  Sometimes there are those who need permission to proceed.  Moving to this leadership style can initially cause apprehension and delays with people who are usually very efficiently completing tasks.  Once again, facilitate individuals reliance on the rest of the team. Agile practice provide us tools to help individuals answer their own questions.  If you are ready for more work, turn to the Kanban board for the next prioritized item on the backlog.  If you are unsure about roles, refer back to the team charter.  If there is anything not covered in the agile tools, talk about it and create something for yourselves (e.g. knowledge base, wiki pages, etc).

##Play: Move to coach

So you have been practicing agile for a while, and you find yourself telling stories about how you past programs handled situations.  Your agile books are dog eared and you quote them as the core of agility while tailoring to each situation.  Although you may hold the same role as a "Project Manager" you have more depth to draw from and are taking more of a coaching stance with your team.  Coaching is comprised of vast and varied agile experience, along with formal training/certifications and continued learning... and lastly passion!

Just as a team starts with a more prescriptive framework to get started, a facilitator starts with training and later is able to apply informed by experience.  Experience with people, process and technology bundle for someone ready to coach.  Mentoring, teaching and facilitating are at the core of coaching, but be ready for anything!  Many times helping a team can mean anything from process re-engineering to technology research, to career discussions.  

The roles may have changed, but ultimatelu striving for a long term, sustainably happy work environment means living through the changes.  Throughout the process acknowledge with each other when things are uncomfortable, and examine if its the change, or if something is truely not working.  Issues may emerge that have always exsisted, so be ready to address them.
