## Agile at scale

We know that agile teams can better handle changing priorities, while being more productive and more predictible (VersionOne, 2016). But, the same things that help us create that environment on a team of 10 may break down when we have 50, 80, or 200 people on the team. Agile at scale is more than simply applying agile practices on multiple teams. Agile at scale requires multiple levels of coordination to ensure all the teams in the enterprise are moving in the same direction. Other aspects such as culture and funding must be considered as well. Implementing agile in an organization cannot be top down or grassroots alone. A successful adoption includes energy coming from both directions.

Keep in mind that, as in teams, "agile" is not sufficient as its own goal. Look to agility to find happier customers, higher team morale, more space for innovation—but not just because it’s “agile.” 

As you get to it, let's just acknowledge **this is hard.** There are no silver bullets, no singular unifying theory or framework that will guarantee stress-free success with agile at scale. It will take trying, learning, and re-learning. For an organization not accustomed to agile methods, it will take significant energy to transition. But, when in doubt, remember to **use agile to scale agile.** Build in constant experimentation and feedback to how you work. Build a foundation of great agile teams; and develop empathic lean-agile leaders. Simple structures and simple changes are almost always better than complex ones. So **think simply**, even for a complex organization. 

Much more so than in individual teams, **consistent training is essential**. Small organizations can accidentally run into great discoveries and organic ways of working, but this is much less likely at scale. Whether using a packaged delivery framework or your own creation, training and alignment are essential. It's important that everyone within an organization is using the same words, understands the same principles. But, don't overemphasize the process! **Process isn't everything.** Process is important, but it’s insufficient for success. Culture is as or more important than process. As your organization transitions toward agile, be mindful that culture change is happening. Guide it; and treasure great culture.


### Play: Train management to be agile

To migrate an entire organization to a new way of thinking and acting, all members of the organization need two-way communication to help everyone understand what it means to the organization and for their particular role. This is most crucial for management at all levels. By educating the management team in the changing mindset and overall vision for the organization, the team can work through the change management together with a unified approach. This communication assists with organizational change, as well as ensuring the teams have the resources and space they need to norm.

> **Lack of an executive sponsor** > The team is enthusiastic about being more collaborative and delivering more value to the end user, but does not see how “management” can help. Or, the management thinks agile is something only the software developers do. Supported by the annual findings in VersionOne’s State of Agile survey (VersionOne, 2016), most barriers to the successful adoption of sustainable agility derive from culture change and support (not just buy-in) from executive level leadership. It is essential to have a leader who understands agile and has the authority to set the vision for its adoption across the organization, program, or team.

### Play: Decentralize decision-making

The key to remaining agile with more than one team is allowing decisions that are made frequently or that lack widespread impact to be made at the team level. Requiring an organizational body to meet and make all decisions for all parts of a large organization often causes delay. The decision delay can be as long as it would take to execute the decision, causing waste in the form of time for an organization. Localized decision-making also contributes to team ownership, which is essential to embodying the agile principles. Centralized decision-making still has a place in large organizations, however. When deciding to centralize a decision, examine whether the decision is infrequent, impacts the entire organization, and has a time constraint. This will help guide whether it would benefit from decentralization.

### Play: Make work, and plans visible
Scaling agile development teams to program or portfolio levels means managing competing needs through alignment of vision and synchronization of sprints and delivery with dependence upon each other. Just as a team has a backlog that is regularly prioritized and elaborated, a program or portfolio must also have a backlog that is groomed to allow for prioritization of work. The backlog at this level needs to have flexibility to align with near-term organizational priorities and enough elaboration to assign the appropriate level of resources. A planning roadmap is a good tool to plan for the near term defined as the current fiscal quarter. Less detail in the roadmap is needed as it progresses to the future, as the longer term needs will continue to be prioritized and elaborated upon on a regular basis.

### Play: Plan for uncertainty in a large organizations
How do you plan for something unplanned? As discussed earlier, decentralizing decision authority is one technique to enable flow and eliminate waiting for a centralized authority. Other ways are to plan only as long-term as required. Put energy into only the immediate or funded activities. Planning beyond that should consume less effort so the team can pivot if organizational context changes. Planning horizons vary among organizations, but often fiscal schedules or contracts guide the overall roadmap. Agile is a mindset; even those at the highest level of the organization need to remember that.

> **Assuming resources, time, and scope can all remain fixed** > We're all familiar with the iron triangle of time, resources, and scope. Agile turns it upside down and adjusts scope assuming time and resources are fixed. Time is fixed by using a cadence and resources are usually associated with money which is also fixed during a period of time. By fixing scope as well you're assuming everything is known in advance and the delivery and solution are predictable. This is often not reality. Much of the solution must be discovered through creativity and experimentation. Fixing all three parameters results in date slip, cost overrun, and/or insufficient delivery. There is no room for injecting new, valuable items based on learning and discovery. By allowing the scope to flex and adjust to accomodate changes in the ecosystem or lessons learned through experimentation we shift from being plan focused to being value focused. 

### Play: Where appropriate, use a known framework for agile at scale

Significant thought has been placed into large-scale agile delivery frameworks. We acknowledge this remains an area of development and change. There's no need to start from scratch. In particular, we'd advise you to look at SAFe, LeSS, and Nexus. Consider these as a starting point. You will find that each of them are well documented by their founders, but all of them share a notion of being context-aware for your situation, customizing to what makes sense for you, so long as it remains built on a solid foundation of agile principles and values.
  * SAFe - http://www.scaledagileframework.com/
  * LeSS - http://less.works
  * Nexus - http://scrum.org
